---
title: 'Creating an Apfell - Part 2'
date: 2018-02-19
permalink: /posts/2018/02/Creating-an-Apfell-Part-2/
tags:
  - Mac
  - Red Teaming
  - Database
  - Postgres
  - Web
---
# Creating an Apfell - Part 2

At the end of the last post we ended up with a very basic RESTful interface to work with some 'operators' and 'callbacks' by leveraging Python 3's asyncio (`async` and `await`) and the Sanic project.
From the first post, we said there are three main parts for this section of our project:
* Database
* Web Server (Sanic)
* User Interface
The next steps we'll discuss are the database and the webserver-database boundary. For our purposes, I'll be using Postgres for the database because it has a nice feature as of version 9 that I want to leverage.
I'll cover this feature later in this post though.

## Peewee - ORM

We are writing our program in Python, and I would like to keep it that way. That means avoiding writing SQL commands as much as possible.
One way to do this is to leverage an ORM (Object Relational Model) that works as an intermediary between Python objects and SQL queries/objects. 
I used [peewee](http://peewee.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) as my ORM so that I can leverage peewee-async to actually connect to my database.
Let's see how this could work:
~~~
import peewee as p
import datetime

class Operator(p.Model):
  username = p.CharField(max_length=64, unique=True, null=False)
  password = p.CharField(max_length=1024, null=False)
  
class Callback(p.Model):
  init_callback = p.DateTimeField(default=datetime.datetime.now, null=False)
  last_checkin = p.DateTimeField(default=datetime.datetime.now, null=False)
  user = p.CharField(max_length=64, null=False)
  host = p.CharField(max_length=255, null=False)
  pid = p.IntegerField(null=False)
  ip = p.CharField(max_length=100, null=False)
  description = p.CharField(max_length=1024, null=True)
  operator = p.ForeignKeyField(Operator, null=True)

Operator.create_table(True)
Callback.create_table(True)
~~~
{: .language-python}
There are some important things to note here. Each class represents a different table in our database, and each member of that class represents a column in that table.
We specify `unique=True` to indicate that column must have all unique values. Similarly, `null=False` means that column cannot be null in a row.
I put this code in `models.py` within the `database_models` folder to keep everything organized.
You can see here that I have a ForeignKeyField in Callback for Operator. This allows us to have a one-to-many relationship where an operator can have many callbacks associated with them. 
This just describes the database, but we still need to actually connect to it.

## Peewee-async 

[peewee-async](https://peewee-async.readthedocs.io/en/latest/peewee_async/api.html#) allows us to connect to our database while keeping our program asynchronous.
In `__init__.py`, add the following:
~~~
import uvloop
from peewee_async import Manager, PooledPostgresqlDatabase

dbloop = uvloop.new_event_loop()
apfell_db = PooledPostgresqlDatabase('apfell_db', user='postgres', password='postgres')
apfell_db.connect_async(loop=dbloop)
db_objects = Manager(apfell_db, loop=dbloop)
~~~
{: .language-python}
and `server.py` becomes:
~~~
from app import apfell, dbloop, apfell_db, db_objects
import asyncio

if __name__ == "__main__":
  asyncio.set_event_loop(dbloop)
  server = apfell.create_server(host='0.0.0.0', port=80)
  loop = asyncio.get_event_loop()
  task = asyncio.ensure_future(server)
  db_objects.database.allow_sync = False  # raise AssertionError on ANY sync call
  try:
      loop.run_until_complete(apfell_db.connect_async(loop=dbloop))
      loop.run_forever()
  except:
      loop.stop()
~~~
{: .language-python}

Ok, that was a lot of confusing code. Let's step through it a little. Asynchronous python relies on event loops. This is what allows Python to act like it has many different threads running within a single process without actually having to spin up other threads and all the headaches that come with threading. This also relies on installing [postgresql](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-install-and-use-postgresql-on-ubuntu-16-04) on your linux machine, with a database called `apfell_db` with username `postgres` and password `postgres `. You should definitely change these for your installation, but they're the defaults here. Manager is a peewee-async mechanism specifically for handling database IO in an asynchronous fashion while still allowing the normal peewee ORM to work underneath. I also set `db_objects.database.allow_sync = False` while I'm doing development so that I know exactly when I accidentally try to make a synchronous connection to the database (*note* This will cause the program to crash). We get our current event loop with `asyncio.get_event_loop()`, add our server as a task in that loop `asyncio.ensure_future(server)`, make sure we successfully connect to the database `loop.run_until_complete(apfell_db.connect_async(loop=dbloop))`, and finally start running our server forever `loop.run_forever()`.

This combined with our previous section will, upon successfully connecting to the database, try to make two tables with columns defined as we specified. The `(True)` part of those `create_table` calls will cause silent fails if the tables already exist. It's important to note that right now I have no migration capabilities. So, if you change the structure of your database, you will need to drop the modified tables before running your program again.

### Manual database connection

If you need to manually connect to your database, you can do so with `psql` from the command line. You can then connect to our database with `\c apfell_db`. `\dt` will allow you to see the tables within the database. `\d+ operator` will allow you to see all the columns and schema information for the operator table. If you want to input information manually, you can do the following:
`insert into operator (username, password) values ('user1', 'pass1');`. If you need to drop a table, simply run `drop table callback cascade;`. 

## Peewee\* in action

Now lets actually try this out. Manually insert some operators into the operator table. Let's update our API to get these operators instead of the ones we hard-coded into our server. Modify `Server/app/routes/routes.py`:
~~~
from app import apfell, db_objects
from app.database_models.model import Operator

@apfell.route("/api/v1.0/operators/", methods=['GET'])
async def get_all_operators(request):
  ops = await db_objects.execute(Operator.select())
  return json([p.to_json() for p in ops])

@apfell.route("/api/v1.0/operators/<id:int>", methods=['GET'])
async def get_one_operator(request, id):
  try:
      op = await db_objects.get(Operator, id=id)
      return json(str(op))
  except:
      print("Failed in /api/v1.0/operators/id for a GET request")
      return abort(404)
~~~
{: .language-python}
This uses the db_objects Manager to make an asynchronous request to the postgresql server for us. This is why you also see an `await` before the call. The `Operator.select()` call allows us to select all operators where as the `db_objects.get(Operator, id=id)` call allows us to get a single specific operator. If you try to get a specific operator and that operator doesn't exist, peewee-async will throw an exception - this is why we surround it with a try/except block. You'll also notice that we are trying the results of these database calls as if they were just python objects. This makes everything pretty seamless from our end. There's just one thing though - how do you print the string form or json form of an arbitrary database object? No idea. So, we'll have to specify that ourselves. Time to update the model!
~~~
class Operator(p.Model):
  username = p.CharField(max_length=64, unique=True, null=False)
  password = p.CharField(max_length=1024, null=False)

  class Meta():
      database = apfell_db

  def to_json(self):
      r = {}
      for k in self._data.keys():
          try:
              r[k] = getattr(self, k)
          except:
              r[k] = json.dumps(getattr(self, k))
      return r

  def __str__(self):
      return str(self.to_json())

class Callback(p.Model):
  init_callback = p.DateTimeField(default=datetime.datetime.now, null=False)
  last_checkin = p.DateTimeField(default=datetime.datetime.now, null=False)
  user = p.CharField(max_length=64, null=False)
  host = p.CharField(max_length=255, null=False)
  pid = p.IntegerField(null=False)
  ip = p.CharField(max_length=100, null=False)
  description = p.CharField(max_length=1024, null=True)
  operator = p.ForeignKeyField(Operator, null=True)

  class Meta():
      database = apfell_db

  def to_json(self):
      r = {}
      for k in self._data.keys():
          try:
              if k == 'operator':
                  r[k] = (getattr(self, k)).to_json()
              else:
                  r[k] = getattr(self, k)
          except:
              r[k] = json.dumps(getattr(self, k))
      r['init_callback'] = r['init_callback'].strftime('%m/%d/%Y:%H:%M:%S')
      r['last_checkin'] = r['last_checkin'].strftime('%m/%d/%Y:%H:%M:%S')
      return r

  def __str__(self):
      return str(self.to_json())
~~~
{: .language-python}
The `__str__(self)` function is called when you try to turn either Operator or Callback into a string. You can format this to include whatever you want. Similarly, we define a `to_json` function which we call in our api method so that we can continue our RESTful API. Additionally, the inner class `Meta()` and corresponding `database = apfell_db` makes sure that these models are associated with our apfell_db database.
